I'm in singapore, and I'm about to go on stage in just a few minutes
I have [not] given a presentation for over a year [now]
I was in a little fender-bender a while back and so I took a little bit of time off
There's this sense of urgency now. The global dollar standard was put in place by a series of
accidental events that were very fortunate for the United States because it gave us an advantage over the rest of the world
But our politicians over the past decade or so have abused this privilege as though
it was their birthright, and now the rest of the world are turning their backs on the US dollar standard
This is going to cause a financial calamity the likes of which we've [never] seen before and it's going to be
devastating for most people. I don't *want* this to happen, but the damage has already been done
So I'm going around trying to alert people and show them how they can protect themselves and
turn this into a great opportunity for themselves
There's always one result from what we are doing right now, expanding the currency supplies all over the planet;
there's one result and that is higher gold and silver prices
I love America – at least the America that the Founding Fathers created
and I'm hoping people get interested in this so that they'll see that
what made America great is the answer to our problems: to get back to
free markets, free people, and sound money. Our own history proves that this is the road to maximum prosperity
We are entering a period of financial crisis that is the greatest the world has ever known
The wealth transfer that will take place during this decade is the greatest wealth transfer in history
Wealth is never destroyed; it is merely transferred, and that means that on the opposite side of every crisis
there is an opportunity. The great news is that all you have to do to turn this crisis into your great
opportunity is to educate yourself. I
believe that the best investment that you can make in your lifetime is your own education:
education on the history of money, education on finance, education on how the global economy works;
education on how all of *these* guys – the central bankers, the stock market – how they can cheat you, how they can scam you. If
you learn what is going on and how the
financial world works, you can put yourself on the correct side of this wealth transfer
Winston Churchill once said that the further you look into the past, the further that you can see into the future. This
program is all about creating your own crystal ball: being able to gaze into the future,
being able to change this crisis – the greatest crisis in the history of mankind –
into your great opportunity
I
was born in Salem, Oregon in 1956 and we moved to California when I was four years old in 1960. But
when I went to school, it was obvious after just the
fourth grade, that there was something different with me; and by fifth grade, I was in remedial classes. And
it turned out that I was dyslexic and teachers were not taught to recognize that back then. I
was always falling behind everyone else.
When I would get a teacher that would
lecture instead of making us read out of books, I would just absolutely excel;
I suddenly went from the dumbest kid in class to the smartest kid in all of the periods of that class
But the result was that,
you know, after a while, I was in every single remedial class, and I just couldn't take it and in tenth grade
I dropped out, middle of 10th grade; and I've never been back to school. I
often say that in every crisis, there's an opportunity; and in this case,
the handicap of dyslexia has also been a blessing. Because I couldn't learn out of books and I couldn't take notes
I just had to remember everything. And
I have the ability to – my brain's wired a little bit differently; I have the ability to
look at a chart
today, and I know how it relates to a chart that I saw 10 years ago
But it was back in about the year 2000 when Steve Jobs of Apple
introduced OS X – the world of books opened up to me... built right into the operating system was a
text-to-speech program;
now I could just have an assistant
slice and scan my books and turn them into text and e-mail me and then all I have to do is highlight the text,
press a button, and the computer reads to me. "People are turning to assets; it will keep their value... if prices rise...
"So much money has been pumped into the system that people are worried about inflation down the road, said Bruno S. Frey, Professor of Economics
at the University of Zurich..." The dyslexia is no longer a problem
But what it's also done for me, is I have the ability to explain complex things to people in a simple manner
for some reason, and so I sort of made it my mission
to try and wake up the middle class, to let them know how the monetary system works; to let them know that
there is a major economic calamity coming sometime down the road
And it's most likely within this decade that we're in right now
The US dollar is
about 60% of the value of all the currency on the planet and
more than half of the dollars reside outside the United States
The reason they –
every country has US dollars is, first of all, that's what central banks use as the reserve currency
Second of all, oil is priced in dollars
So this is the world and what we –
what you see here
is that these are the countries that are avoiding the US dollar in trade;
they're doing bilateral agreements where they'll either hold each other's currency and
settle that way, or they're establishing – like right now, they're talking about a BRICS bank: Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa
having a bank that will do settlements between the countries directly without using the US dollar
These countries, they tried to avoid using the US dollar like Iran tried
and we banned them from using SWIFT
How many here have made wire transfers before? So do you know what a SWIFT number is?
It's a code that you plug in and this SWIFT system is what transfers those dollars
from one person's account to another person's account. Well Iran
decided that they were going to sell oil
only in Euros; they got banned from SWIFT
But there's countries right now coming up with a replacement for SWIFT, and it doesn't use the dollars, the SUCRE system; and
Iraq started selling oil for Euros
In
Libya, they were talking about creating the gold dinar and
selling oil for gold. So, those are the countries that are trying to use
something other than the dollar. Then we've got gold competing with currency
and there's a lot of talk around here about the gold dinar, and there's people that are actually using gold in some of the
countries over here. And then in Utah, Utah has recognized gold and silver as money again
It's legal tender currency in the state of Utah in the United States. And then you've got physical gold accumulation
I'll show you later that China is accumulating an immense amount of gold; that all the countries with an up arrow, that's gold accumulation
Then we have gold repatriation
Germany has been asking for their gold back, and they're getting it
Venezuela has repatriated their gold from the Bank of England. And
then, if we put this on a timeline
Here's the nails in the coffin for the dollar standard and you will see that there's not a lot of time left
This is my evidence that I think is proof that the death of the dollar is coming, and it's coming shortly
Nixon ended Bretton Woods
and we went on the dollar standard. Then the first nail in the coffin is, Iraq sells oil in Euros; the crisis of
2008 and we added
1.25 trillion to our base money in the United States. As we add to the base currency, people get worried about inflation;
they start rushing toward gold and silver. Iran ends oil sales in dollars
and they're taking commodities in trade for oil, they're taking – in
Turkey, they take the local currency and then buy gold in Turkey and export the gold to Iran,
so they're basically selling oil for gold. They do the same thing with India
QE2 – quantitative easing, that's more currency printing in the United States
Libya
China and Russia bypassed the dollar, they did a bilateral trade agreement where they hold each other's currency
and they do direct debt settlement without having to wire transfer US dollars
Chinese president just recently, said that the dollar as the world's reserve currency is a product of the past
Utah recognized silver and gold as money
China and Iran bypass the US dollar with a bilateral trade agreement. Venezuela repatriates its gold. China and Japan
trade directly
India and Japan bypass the US dollar. Russia and Iran trade directly
Iran sells India oil for Rupees and commodities. China and Brazil trade directly
Swiss citizens demand gold repatriation
African countries ban the dollar; in Zambia, you can go to JAIL if you use US dollars
Quantitative easing
number three: they have announced at the Federal Reserve that they're going to be – they're starting with 40 billion dollars of
currency that they're creating each month and now it jumps to 85 billion dollars
That's more than one trillion a year;
and remember, it took 200 years to go from no dollars to 825 billion. And now they're going to create a
trillion every year
Iran trading energy for gold
Singapore removes tax on money
Germany repatriates 150
tons of gold from the New York Fed. The citizens of Netherland demand gold repatriation
Ecuador
repatriates part of its gold reserves
Austrian citizens demanding gold
repatriation. China acknowledges fundamental market shortage of gold. And
now
the Fed is increasing the rate of printing when I said from 40 to 85
billion every month; just over a trillion per year
So those are the nails in the coffin for the dollar standard; and if you noticed, they are all speeding up
and they're all happening right now
You don't have a whole lot of time; and if you wait too long, then the opportunity is gone
It's going to fail
Why is the dollar sacrosanct? Why is it *not* going to happen to the US dollar? What will?
People think, oh no, it's high technology;
we have computers now, or the internet – these are ridiculous arguments
The truth is, all fiat currencies have failed and there's no reason why this one won't. What worries me again so much
is that it's a global situation. And so it's going to cause problems on a global basis
And it's a trust breaking down. And you're already seeing the trust breaking down, as I said earlier – because you're seeing different
countries exchange directly with each other's currency, circumventing the dollar; you're seeing that in oil;
you're going to see it more and more and people are just going to opt out of the dollar. And
you'll probably get to a point before the whole thing collapses entirely
where the dollar is more or less used internally, United States, and externally it's not used as much
because there'll be a lot of
agreements made between nation states outside of the United States that will want to use each other's currency and not the dollar
This isn't going to be pretty when it happens
I am not an end-of-worlder or a doomsday guy. All you can do is play the hand that you are dealt
If we go to a new monetary system, and I think it's absolutely inevitable:
there's just too much energy built up in this one that has to
release; it has to come crashing down somehow
When that happens, there's an enormous wealth transfer
for people that are on one side of the bet or another. And
people don't realize that
whether they are – they think they are making a bet or not, they are making the bet
They are involved; this wealth transfer affects everybody, whether you want to participate or not. If you are holding paper assets
and
paper currencies, you have bet one direction; if you're holding gold and physical assets
you've bet the opposite direction
So, these are changes in Chinese holdings. They are accumulating gold, they are getting rid of US Treasury bonds
This is gold held in China. The green line is the cumulative
gold, that's on this side, this scale, so it's gone from about
700 tons
to almost 6,000 tons just since the year 2000. So this is their central bank holdings
This is their mine supply
But this is – and my researcher put all of this data together. You're the first people to see this –
this is the amount of
gold flowing through the Hong Kong exchange that goes into China and
the past couple of years here, they have ramped up their buying. They know
that the dollar standard is coming to an end and they are protecting themselves, and you're probably going to see
gold-backed Renminbi someday – the Yuan
So
this is an interesting chart:
Change in Global Influence
So this is the correlation to this basket of currencies. This basket of currencies, if you add them all up,
they're trading up or they're trading down and this was
pre-Crisis, so it's before 2008, so – this is from the International Monetary Fund, it's their data –
so from 2005 to
2008, this is the correlation of,
you know, if that basket of currencies was trading up, the dollar was probably doing about the same thing, is what it's saying
That Chinese Renminbi, a little less so. And then, this is today
The US dollar is done for!
I don't think there's any question we're heading for a new monetary system. The question is, what would it consist of
You know, the four choices are sort of a
world of multiple reserve currencies, and Barry Eichengreen
of Berkeley is the leading proponent of this, or leading
scholar on this topic. The problem with that and where I disagree with Eichengreen is there's no anchor in that system
We did have multiple reserve currencies before, in the 1920s
He's right about that
And it was sterling in the dollar, but they were both anchored to gold. And in the post-Bretton Woods world since
1944, it's been one reserve currency
which is the anchor, and it was anchored to gold until 1971. Since then, the dollar has been detached from gold
but all the other currencies are still linked to the dollar
So at the end of the day we've had an anchor of some kind, we've never had a world
of multiple reserve currencies with no anchor. I'm not sure that's that stable. The SDR
is the second choice. The SDR is a basket currency sponsored by the IMF
At least for the time being it's also printed money; the IMF literally prints the SDRs
ships them out to the members. And their reserves go up, exactly the way the Fed creates money and
bank reserves go up
But it's not backed by anything. Third choice is gold, some variation on the gold standard
And the fourth choice is what I call chaos, which is that nobody does anything; there's a lot of wishful thinking;
there's a lot of denial;
there's a lot of delay, and we get to the point where people just totally lose faith in paper currencies,
go to hard assets, and we have a sequential
collapse of paper currencies around the world – at which point, governments will have to react with emergency measures. That could include coercion, confiscation,
you know, various sorts of freezes on paper assets... could be a lot of things in that scenario, so to me
it's multiple reserve currencies, SDRs, gold, or chaos
I favor gold, but I fear that we may get chaos
I've talked about every 30 to 40 years the world has a new monetary system. And
the thing is that over the years, governments and these central – and the banks, have basically screwed us more and more and more
And these new currency systems are always created by the same idiots that created the last one that fell apart
It's the big banks, it's the central banks, and it's
governments that are creating these new systems each time; and each time
the system they come up with
is a system that cheats the population more and enriches the government and the banks more. It's a system that transfers wealth
at greater and greater speeds. You know, this one is going to fall apart just like all of the others
There's a difference this time, though: there's the internet. People are connected all over the world; information is spreading and people are getting educated
So I'm hoping that we go back to gold. Not a gold standard; gold standards suck
Did a video on that
With a gold standard
there's supposed to be a certain amount of gold in the vaults for each unit of currency. In other words
It's a one-to-one ratio,
is the way that it started. And then, they print more receipts than gold that exists
So if we have gold standards, we're going to get scammed again
If we used gold and silver, if the public gets educated enough before all of this happens
If we went back to gold and silver, then governments can't scam us; it limits
their ability to transfer wealth from the population to the government and to the banks
A lot of people say that you can't use gold and silver today because they're too heavy and bulky and it's completely wrong
You could put gold and silver in a vault and you could make payments to somebody by transferring ownership of
nanograms, grams, or ounces of gold and silver from one person's account to another
by means of a check, a credit card, or even your cell phone
If we go back to a
gold-backed currency,
gold-backed US dollar,
at that point,
I think the minimum scam that the US could get away with, which means
the minimum number of dollars in existence that they could make
convertible into gold, would be the dollars that are held in foreign central banks
That would be similar to the Bretton Woods system that we had from 1944 to '71. Well,
I did some analysis on this when I was writing the book back in 2005, and back then it required $20,000 an ounce gold
for the Treasury to have enough gold to cover those dollars – or the New York Fed, actually – and
if they were going to back all of the dollars, you're talking gold measured in the hundreds of thousands of dollars per ounce
There just isn't that much gold and there's a whole lot of currency. We keep on printing it every minute of every day
This is gold and how it accounts for currency supply
This is our base money in the United States, which was
gold back here from 1900 until the Federal Reserve; the amount of currency in circulation and gold were the same
Then we established the Federal Reserve and we inflated for World War I; and we had more currency in circulation
than we had gold to back it. There were some bank runs in the '30s; then
Roosevelt unpegged the dollar from gold and
gold's value rose from $20 an ounce to
$35 an ounce. And when it did, the value of the gold held at the US Treasury
rose to meet the value of all the currency that was printed in the meantime
Here's the same chart again, but now I'm taking it out to
1971. And what you see is these gold inflows during World War I, during World War II, it's another
117 percent
gold increase. This is what made the United States a superpower: it's all financial
It isn't our war machine
necessarily; it's all the gold inflows that we got because everybody else was at war and we were
isolated from it. And they had to pay us for all their consumer goods and so on. And
then we jumped into the war and we inflated, and then in about
1959,
countries started figuring out that we didn't have all the gold
You know, we were printing more dollars than gold that we had to back it; and under the Bretton Woods system
they could go to the New York Fed and turn in their dollars for gold at $35 per ounce. Only foreign central banks –
individuals couldn't do that
So gold started flowing out and the US
lost 50% of its gold from '59 to '71, and in the meantime, we kept on printing currency
If this had continued until it got down to zero, if there was one more dollar
out there that laid claim to gold, that came in and said, "we want our gold for currency"
and there was no gold to back it up, the entire world monetary system would have come crashing down
So Nixon had to take us off of the Bretton Woods system, the last vestiges of the gold standard, in August 15th of '71
So here's the same chart again:
there's the first chart and
the
second chart to '71, and now I'm taking it out to '85, and I'm adding a second line here
How many people would agree that credit cards are replacing cash in circulation?
Yeah, credit cards – you use your credit card more and more every year, right? You use cash less and less. Well
this is outstanding credit card balances. It's called
Revolving Credit Outstanding, is the name of the chart that you get from the Federal Reserve
When you charge something on a credit card, you create currency
The bank didn't actually loan you anything; they invented numbers
And then they have the gall to charge you interest if you don't pay those numbers back on time
But
so, the thing is, that the merchant that you're paying, the restaurant or the grocery store, that
merchant's checking account can't tell the difference between the credit dollars that *you* created or the cash dollars that you pay him
So to that merchant's checking account, it all looks the same. And those dollars that you created stay in circulation until
somebody saves them up and pays down credit card debt. So
unpaid credit card balances, I include as part of the cash in circulation. And in
1971, Nixon took us off the gold standard and gold became a freely traded, separate, commodity-slash-money,
and it did an accounting of the currency supply
There was quite a while here where we could have gone back on the gold standard. The value of the gold at the Treasury exceeded
all the dollars printed: from George Washington to Jimmy Carter. And
for a week or so, a couple of weeks, it
exceeded base money *plus* outstanding revolving credit. So here's the same chart again. That was to
1985 and now I'm going to take it out to today. And so there's that
1980 peak where it shot past base money and base money + outstanding revolving credit
And then we get to the crisis of '08 and
Ben Bernanke – oh, by the way, instead of billions, we're now measuring in trillions
So we started in millions, and then it went to billions and now it's trillions
So, we did the bailouts and all the quantitative easings, and that's what the currency supply looks like today. And then, they announced
quantitative easing
3, which is that 85 billion a month that they're creating, and they think they're going to have to do it until about 2015
So, here's the projection: for gold covering the currency supply today, would be
$13,400 per ounce
gold, for history to repeat and for gold to do the same thing that it did in
1934 *and* in 1980. And believe me, it shocked people in 19- – in the
1970s. When gold was
$35 an ounce and
Nixon took us off the Bretton Woods system, all the economists were predicting that gold was going to go down, because now there was going
to be no more monetary demand for it
Anybody that said gold was going to go to a *hundred* bucks was considered an absolute lunatic –
and it went to 850; it rose 24 times its price. Well, when I wrote my book,
we were right here with base money: so base money + outstanding revolving credit. It took about $6000 an ounce for history to repeat;
today it takes $13,400. And if you include the same
overshoot – remember in 1980, it didn't just cover base money
but it shot past it – $24,000 an ounce gold is what it would require
to meet that. Except we've – the Fed has announced that they're going to keep on printing
currency until there's lower unemployment, and the economy gets back on track. And they think till 2015. So
the projected price, according to the Fed and history repeating, if that was to – if the Fed does this, and
then history repeats and gold – the public gets afraid of
what the Federal Reserve is doing, and they rush toward gold and silver to protect their purchasing power,
gold would have to rise from there to way up here and that is
$26,000 per ounce gold to cover. If it does the same overshoot, we're talking about
$47,000 an ounce gold. Now, I don't even like to measure gold in
dollars. If you measure it in a price, price doesn't mean anything;
it's the value. How much can you buy with the proceeds? If we have
deflation and some of this currency evaporates, because it's all just numbers that they type into a computer these days – if
we have deflation, maybe gold peaks at
$3,000 an ounce and the currency supply collapses to way down here somewhere,
and the Dow is at
1500. That means gold will still be double the Dow; you're still going to get
14 times more paper assets one day than you can buy today with them
And it's probably only a couple of years left
that this is going to take, as you saw about how the nails in the coffin of the dollar standard, how they're speeding up
If we have big INflation and the Dow goes to
30,000, maybe gold will be $60,000 an ounce; and if we have hyperinflation, the Dow would be
30 trillion and gold would be 60 trillion
It doesn't matter; in any case, gold would buy you 14 times more paper assets than it does today
So, these are the global assets: here's the sto-... the bond market, here's the stock market,
this is the value of real estate on the planet, and
these are bank deposits
And there's gold
Now that little slice of the pie is going to get a lot bigger in just the next few years,
and it's not going to do it by a whole bunch more gold
just appearing. It's going to do it by the price of other assets going down or
at least their value going down and the value of gold going up
So the price of gold will change, that piece of the pie is going to grow; it was a lot bigger back in
1980, when gold was at $850
It's going to get a lot bigger today again; but today, as you've seen, it requires far far higher prices
So, the death of the dollar standard: how many people here believe that I'm sort of predicting what's going on in the
future here? You can see, that there's a new world monetary system coming
It happens every 30 to 40 years; except this time, instead
of a baby step off of gold, we've got to go from nothing back to something. It's going to be a worldwide
convulsion, the scale of which has never been seen before
At the end of the day, the fundamental, fundamental driver of gold, it's not so much that gold's in a bull market,
it's more the dollar's in a bear market. And people say, well, how high can gold go? And my answer is, well,
how low can the dollar go? The answer is the dollar can go to zero
If you divide any number by 0 the answer is infinity. So gold can go to infinity if the dollar goes to zero. Now, in
the real world,
something else will happen. It's not that gold becomes worth infinite number of dollars;
it's more the case that the dollar just falls off the stage. The dollar gets the hook, so to speak, and
you'll count gold in dollars to five thousand, to ten thousand at some point, but there will come a time
when you won't count gold in dollars anymore, because dollars won't count. People won't want dollars
There is so much opportunity in crisis, it is absolutely extraordinary. That's just not me saying that, that's just history
You read any amount of history – and I don't mean last week, I mean real history – you know, in times of crisis,
it's when huge fortunes were made. Times of crisis is when human beings create and develop newest technologies and new...
science and new medicines. In times of crisis, there's so much opportunity – as long as you can remain calm, get educated,
be resourceful. The challenge for most people is that in crisis
they go into crisis mode. Which means they go into scarcity, they go into lack, they go into blame; and
none of those emotions are resourceful for helping you solve whatever challenge is in front of you
I believe that this is probably the greatest
opportunity of anyone's lifetime. There has never been a
situation where all the – everything came together, just like this. This is the first time in history
where all the world's currencies are just fiat currencies backed by nothing
And if what happens – what I think is going to happen happens,
this is the greatest wealth transfer in history. It's the greatest opportunity. And it'll never happen in our lifetimes again
So now we've learned the following hidden secrets of money. There is a global loss of confidence in the US dollar that is accelerating rapidly
The change to a new monetary system is inevitable and will most likely be chaotic
Gold standards do not work over long periods of time,
but gold itself does. The public contributes to the massive amounts of currency creation by using credit cards and signing loans
Gold has already accounted for the expansion of US dollars twice in the last century and may likely do so again
So that's it for this episode. I thank you for watching and I hope you enjoyed it
I know I threw around a bunch of astronomical prices for gold someday in the future, but it isn't the price measured in dollars
It's, how much is its value? What is it worth?
How much stuff can it purchase? The price measured in dollars, or any currency for that matter,
is just a bunch of numbers
And it really doesn't mean anything
There are numbers that are created by the world's central banks, by the commercial bank system,
and we're forced to transact in these currencies; but in our next episode,
we're going to clear away the smokescreen of national currencies and show you how the world monetary system really works, and
how all national currencies *have* to continue losing value
It is not possible for them to maintain purchasing power over any reasonable period of time
As for the golden nails in the dollar's coffin, it's only been a short while since we filmed the presentation in Singapore and
already there are more of them. So for an update, visit HiddenSecretsofMoney.com, and in your free information
toolkit,
there's an exclusive presentation on the latest developments of the golden nails in the dollar's coffin. Now
I know this episode was kind of serious, and it might have you upset right now, but believe me,
it's not all doom and gloom. As I've said many, many times before, there are these brief moments in history
where the safest asset class, the safe haven investment for the last 5000 years,
also becomes the asset class that has the greatest potential gains in purchasing power. And I have bet my life on it
First I became an investor back in 2002, and then I started telling everybody about it. I started warning them
what was going to happen with the world economy and how to protect themselves, and I made it my mission to
educate as many as I could
So in 2005, I wrote my book. And then I gave people a means to protect themselves and opened up GoldSilver.com
I believe that my team and I have created the world's best precious metals dealership,
because we don't just sell gold and silver; we are gold and silver investors. And what we want to do is help you
understand how to get through what is coming, to protect yourself, and to turn all of these bad things around to your benefit
So if you decide that precious metals are for you, please visit GoldSilver.com
We'd love the opportunity to become your dealer, because we feel that we are more than a dealer;
we are a partner with you, and we're on the same side of the fence as you
So thank you very much, good luck, we'll see you at the exclusive presentation at HiddenSecretsofMoney.com
Thanks
Do you think this is a "man the lifeboats" situation? Let me ask you this:
if you knew the Titanic was going to sink
and you were *on* the Titanic, you know there's going to be a lifeboat situation coming up soon
Would you like – (...have life boats available) – that's right: would you like to get in the lifeboat early, get a nice seat?
Maybe close to the water. Maybe closer to the [food] supply
Right there in the middle, nice and comfy... or you want to be one of the last ones on the boat and you're jockeying for position?
You have to throw a kid out to make room for you. Yeah, so uh...
you know, lifeboat situation, it depends
...how you like your accommodations on the lifeboat, is whether you should be
working your way towards it right now. And I will be edging my way towards it right now
Mike Maloney's Hidden Secrets of Money is made possible by the clients of GoldSilver.com
Your continued loyalty and support allows us to educate the public on how to both protect themselves and benefit in the turbulent times ahead
To all GoldSilver.com customers: thank you. Hidden Secrets of Money would not be possible without you